Good afternoon everyone, and welcome to this introductory lecture on programming. Today we will be exploring what programming is, the different types of programming languages, high-level vs low-level languages, compiled vs interpreted languages, and programming vs markup languages. We will also briefly touch on some other programming languages that are not commonly used but are interesting to know about.

What is programming?
Programming allows humans to give computers instructions, and it is what drives all new apps, websites, and programs. It is one of the most valuable skills in the world and spans every context that computers are used for. This includes high-speed microcontrollers in vehicles and sensors; low-performance, low-energy mobile devices; mid-performance personal computers; high-capacity internet servers and databases; and machine learning and AI algorithms.

What are programming languages?
Programming languages are used to communicate with and issue instructions to computers, specifically to the computer's processors. Different languages have different features and capabilities. Some languages are context-specific, like Solidity or JavaScript, and often can't be used outside of that context. Other languages are fairly universal, like C++, and are used almost everywhere. Some languages are very easy to learn, such as Python, while others are very technical and complicated, such as C and C++.

High-level vs Low-level languages
Low-level languages are languages close to, or directly in contact with, the computer's hardware. This category primarily involves assembly, a language designed to give human-readable names to binary machine code instructions. Assembly directly controls the registers, memory usage, and operations performed inside a computer's processors. Assembly is extremely difficult to use and is also extremely dangerous, as it has no safeguards in place to detect and prevent self-destructive code. Fortunately, assembly is rarely used today thanks to high-level languages like C++, but it is still used in fields involving microcontroller engineering and other low-level hardware that can't be programmed with a high-level language.

High-level languages are languages that simplify low-level languages to make programming easier and safer. Almost all programming and development today is done in high-level languages. Different languages are designed for different purposes and contexts. JavaScript, Python, and Solidity are high-level programming languages that we will be learning in this course--and the only low-level code we may encounter will occur in Solidity, but this will be a simple copy-paste operation.

Compiled vs Interpreted Languages
Compiled languages must be turned into machine code by a compiler program before they can be run. They are often downloaded onto a user's machine and run directly on its processors. They are fast and light, but incompatible with other operating systems and cannot be easily changed. They must be developed and compiled for Windows, Mac, and Linux machines separately. Compiled languages are more compatible with the Waterfall development approach, as their code cannot be changed without recompiling and replacing the entire program.

Interpreted languages are turned into machine code by an interpreter program line-by-line as they are read. They are not run directly on the machine's processors. The interpreter runs on one processor, which requires many operations to be run for every line of code that it interprets. Because of this, interpreted languages are slow and inefficient compared to compiled languages, as the interpreter carries a lot of overhead. However, unlike compiled languages they can be run by any machine without needing different versions of the same program, as each machine has its own interpreter. They can also be easily updated and changed, as the code is not compiled until it is being read. They are used primarily for websites and web applications, particularly those that don't need to process huge amounts of data.

Programming vs Markup Languages
Programming languages issue logical and computational instructions to the computer. Often, they involve applied mathematics, Boolean logic, and complex systems. They define variables, functions, objects, and data the computer can work with. They allow a computer to make decisions based on the data it has and the instructions associated with that data. Programs are often described as being similar to recipes--a set a steps that the computer walks through line by line, performing each task along the way, until the final step is complete. Programming is the act of creating the recipe that the computer follows. Programming languages are used for creating programs, web applications, operating systems, scripts, AIs, and so much more.

Markup languages instruct a computer how to format and display a document. They decorate and align text, links, headers, and other components. They don't typically contain any logic or decision-making capabilities. Rather than being like a recipe that bakes a cake, they are simply a description of what the cake looks like. They are used primarily in HTML and CSS in web development, but also in Markdown (MD) files for documentation.

Other Languages
There are several other types of computer languages that are interesting to know about, but are not important for this course.

Machine Code, also called binary code, is the 1's and 0's all code is reduced to that only a machine can understand. Many decades ago, programmers used to create programs on punch-cards, which were all done in binary machine code. Locating a "bug" in the program was a very tedious process. Fortunately, nobody alive today builds programs in machine code, and very few people even know how to read it.

Assembly Languages are one step above binary code. Many decades ago, programmers--being the lazy geniuses that they are--got tired of dealing with machine code and decided to make their lives easier. They began labelling binary operations with human-readable names, like STUR for "Store Register", or ADD for "Addition", and they began using actual base-10 numbers instead of binary numbers. This vastly reduced the complexity of programming, and massively reduced the errors. However, make no mistake: The only language that is harder and more dangerous to code in is machine code. Assembly language has been all but replaced by high-level languages like C++, which hide all the complexities of assembly behind human-friendly syntax.

Query Languages are used for accessing and using databases. They are quite simple to use and understand, usually involving commands to get or store data from certain entries, or to search and filter data in the database. SQL is probably the most commonly used query language in use today, but there are others as well.

Scripting Languages are used by command-line interfaces and terminals for automating various tasks. We will use a little bit of scripting language when we use the terminal for interacting with the Node Package Manager and setting up a live website on a server, but we won't dive very deep into actual scripting algorithms. Powershell is an example of a scripting language used by Windows machines to navigate and interact with the machine's file system.

Esoteric Languages, or Esolangs, are created as jokes by bored programmers, either for silliness, creative inspiration, or pure malice. These languages have no practical application, and were never intended for it. For instance, Polite requires the user to frequently use the keyword "please", or else the compiler will get angry. Piet is a language that uses abstract art as a programming language. Whitespace is a language that is coded entirely with whitespace characters--like spaces, tabs, and newlines. Malbolge was created to be as difficult to code in as possible, so much so that it took 2 years after its release before the first "Hello World" program surfaced. Esolangs have no practical use other than to amuse their creators and give bored programmers a challenge to work on--but they are also fun to look at.

In conclusion, programming is the practice of giving computers instructions, which is what drives all new apps, websites, and programs. There are different types of programming languages that fall into the categories of high-level and low-level languages. In the high-level category we find compiled and interpreted languages, which can also be separated into programming and markup languages. Each type of language has its own benefits and drawbacks, and each language is designed for different purposes and contexts.

Each programming language is a tool designed to handle a particular job, and they should be treated as such. Most programming languages are descendants of C and C++, and they share many of the same features, data types, and syntax. Therefore, if you can learn one C-based language, then learning the rest becomes much easier. In this course, all programming languages that we will learn will be based on the C/C++ paradigm.

Thank you for joining me in this introductory lecture on programming and the history of programming.